## DCL in Detail

Database servers usually contain very important data. We can use access control to make sure this data is safe, and DCL is what solves this problem. It can grant access permissions to a specified user, or take back specified permissions from a specified user. DCL is very important to database administrators, because user permission management is related to database security. Simply speaking, through DCL we can allow trusted users to access the database, stop untrusted users from accessing the database, and at the same time minimize the permissions of each visitor, so that the visitor's permissions are just enough.

### Creating Users

We can use the SQL below to create a user and specify an access password.

```sql
CREATE USER 'wangdachui'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'Wang.618';
```

The SQL above creates a user named `wangdachui`. Its password is `Wang.618`. This user can access the database server from any host, because after `@` we used the wildcard `%`, which can represent any number of characters. If we want to limit the user `wangdachui` so that it can only access the database server from hosts in the `192.168.0.x` network segment, we can modify the SQL statement in the following way.

```sql
DROP USER IF EXISTS 'wangdachui'@'%';

CREATE USER 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%' IDENTIFIED BY 'Wang.618';
```

At this time, if we use the `wangdachui` account to access the database server, we can hardly do any operation, because this account does not have any operation permission.

### Granting Privileges

We use the statement below to grant `wangdachui` the permission to query the college table (`tb_college`) in the `school` database.

```sql
GRANT SELECT ON `school`.`tb_college` TO 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

We can also let `wangdachui` have query permission on all objects in the `school` database, as shown below.

```sql
GRANT SELECT ON `school`.* TO 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

If we want `wangdachui` to also have `insert`, `delete`, and `update` permissions, we can do it in the following way.

```sql
GRANT INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE ON `school`.* TO 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

If we also want to grant `wangdachui` permission to execute DDL, we can use the SQL shown below.

```sql
GRANT CREATE, DROP, ALTER ON `school`.* TO 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

If we want the `wangdachui` account to have all operation permissions on all objects of all databases, we can run the operation shown below. But in general, we would not do this, because as we said before, permissions only need to be just enough. An ordinary account should not have such large permissions.

```sql
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

### Revoking Privileges

If we want to take back the `insert`, `delete`, and `update` permissions that `wangdachui` has on the `school` database, we can use the operation below.

```sql
REVOKE INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE ON `school`.* FROM 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

If we want to take back all permissions, we can do it in the following way.

```sql
REVOKE ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* FROM 'wangdachui'@'192.168.0.%';
```

It should be explained that because the database may cache user permissions, after granting or taking back permissions, we can run the following statement to make the new permissions take effect at once.

```sql
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
```
