## New Features in MySQL

### JSON Type

When many developers use relational databases for data persistence, they often feel that structured storage lacks flexibility, because all columns and their data types must be designed in advance. During business development and change, if the table structure needs to be modified, this is definitely a troublesome and painful thing. Starting from MySQL 5.7, MySQL introduced support for the `JSON` data type. MySQL 8.0 solved the JSON logging performance bottleneck. If the JSON type is used well, it actually breaks the boundary between relational databases and non-relational databases, and brings more convenience to data persistence operations.

JSON data commonly appears in two forms:

1. JSON object

```JSON
{"name": "Luo Hao", "tel": "13122335566", "QQ": "957658"}
```

2. JSON array

```JSON
[1, 2, 3]
```

```JSON
[{"name": "Luo Hao", "tel": "13122335566"}, {"name": "Wang Dachui", "QQ": "123456"}]
```

Where do we need to use the JSON type? Let us look at a simple example. Now many products support many login ways for users, such as mobile phone number, WeChat, QQ, Sina Weibo, and so on. But in general we will not ask users to provide all this information. If we use the traditional design way, we need to design many columns to match many login ways, and we may also need to allow these columns to have null values. Obviously this is not a very good choice. On the other hand, if the product adds one more login way, then we must modify the previous table structure, which is even more painful. But with the JSON type, the problem just mentioned is solved easily. We can make the design shown below.

```SQL
CREATE TABLE `tb_test`
(
`user_id`    bigint unsigned,
`login_info` json,
PRIMARY KEY (`user_id`)
);

INSERT INTO `tb_test` 
VALUES 
    (1, '{"tel": "13122335566", "QQ": "654321", "wechat": "jackfrued"}'),
    (2, '{"tel": "13599876543", "weibo": "wangdachui123"}');
```

If you need to query a user's phone number and WeChat ID, you can use the SQL shown below.

```SQL
SELECT `user_id`
     , JSON_UNQUOTE(JSON_EXTRACT(`login_info`, '$.tel')) AS phone
     , JSON_UNQUOTE(JSON_EXTRACT(`login_info`, '$.wechat')) AS wechat
FROM `tb_test`;
```

```
+---------+-------------+-----------+
| user_id | phone       | wechat    |
+---------+-------------+-----------+
|       1 | 13122335566 | jackfrued |
|       2 | 13599876543 | NULL      |
+---------+-------------+-----------+
```

Because MySQL supports the JSON type, it also provides a matching set of functions for handling JSON data, such as the `json_extract` and `json_unquote` functions used above. Of course, the SQL above also has a more convenient way to write it:

```SQL
SELECT `user_id`
     , `login_info` ->> '$.tel' AS phone
     , `login_info` ->> '$.wechat' AS wechat
  FROM `tb_test`;
```

Let us look at another example. If our product needs to build user profiles for users by adding tags, and then recommend platform services or consumer goods based on user profiles, we can also use the JSON type to save user profile data. The sample code is shown below.

Create the tag table:

```SQL
CREATE TABLE `tb_tags`
(
`tag_id`   int unsigned NOT NULL COMMENT 'Tag ID',
`tag_name` varchar(20)  NOT NULL COMMENT 'Tag name',
PRIMARY KEY (`tag_id`)
);

INSERT INTO `tb_tags` (`tag_id`, `tag_name`) 
VALUES
    (1, 'Born in the 1970s'),
    (2, 'Born in the 1980s'),
    (3, 'Born in the 1990s'),
    (4, 'Born in the 2000s'),
    (5, 'Likes sports'),
    (6, 'Highly educated'),
    (7, 'Middle class'),
    (8, 'Owns a house'),
    (9, 'Owns a car'),
    (10, 'Likes movies'),
    (11, 'Likes online shopping'),
    (12, 'Frequently orders takeout');
```

Store user tags:

```SQL
CREATE TABLE `tb_users_tags`
(
`user_id`   bigint unsigned NOT NULL COMMENT 'User ID',
`user_tags` json            NOT NULL COMMENT 'User tags'
);

INSERT INTO `tb_users_tags`
VALUES
    (1, '[2, 6, 8, 10]'),
    (2, '[3, 10, 12]'),
    (3, '[3, 8, 9, 11]');
```

Next, let us understand the clever parts of the JSON type through a group of queries.

1. Users who like movies (`10`):

```SQL
SELECT `user_id`
  FROM `tb_users_tags`
 WHERE 10 MEMBER OF (`user_tags`->'$');
```

2. Users who like movies and were born in the 1980s:

```SQL
SELECT `user_id`
  FROM `tb_users_tags`
 WHERE JSON_CONTAINS(`user_tags`->'$', '[2, 10]');
```

3. Users who are either movie lovers, born in the 1980s, or born in the 1990s:

```SQL
SELECT `user_id`
  FROM `tb_users_tags`
 WHERE JSON_OVERLAPS(user_tags->'$', '[2, 3, 10]');
```

> **Note**: The queries above use the `member of` predicate and two JSON functions. `json_contains` can check whether a JSON array contains the specified elements, while `json_overlaps` can check whether a JSON array has an overlapping part with the specified array.

### Window Functions

Starting from MySQL 8.0, MySQL supports window functions. Most commercial databases and some open-source databases had already provided support for window functions. Some also call them OLAP (online analytical processing) functions. From the name, we can know they are related to statistics and analysis. To help everyone understand window functions, let us first talk about the idea of a window.

A window can be understood as a set of records. A window function is a special function executed on a set of records that meets some condition, and for every record the function is executed inside this window. Window functions are easy to confuse with the aggregate functions we talked about above. The main difference between them is that aggregate functions combine many records into one record, while window functions are executed for each record, and the number of records does not change after execution. Window functions are not only a few functions. They are a complete set of syntax, and the functions are only one part of that syntax. The basic syntax is shown below:

```SQL
<window_function> OVER (PARTITION BY <grouping_columns> ORDER BY <sorting_columns> ROWS BETWEEN ... AND ...)
<window_function> OVER (PARTITION BY <grouping_columns> ORDER BY <sorting_columns> RANGE BETWEEN ... AND ...)
```

In the syntax above, the position of the window function can be filled by the following two kinds of functions:

1. Dedicated window functions such as `lead`, `lag`, `first_value`, `last_value`, `rank`, `dense_rank`, and `row_number`.
2. Aggregate functions such as `sum`, `avg`, `max`, `min`, and `count`.

Below we give a few simple examples of using window functions. We directly use the `hrs` database created in the previous lesson.

Example 1: Query employees ranked 4th to 6th by salary.

```SQL
SELECT * 
  FROM (SELECT `ename`
             , `sal`
             , ROW_NUMBER() over (ORDER BY `sal` DESC) AS `rk`
	      FROM `tb_emp`) AS `temp`
 WHERE `rk` between 4 and 6;
```

> **Note**: The function `row_number()` used above can generate a row number for each record. In actual work, it can be replaced with `rank()` or `dense_rank()` according to need. The difference among the three can be understood by reading the official documentation or [this article](https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/92654574). In MySQL versions before 8, we can complete a similar operation in the following way.

```SQL
select `rank`, `ename`, `sal` from (
       select @a:=@a+1 as `rank`, `ename`, `sal` 
       from `tb_emp`, (select @a:=0) as t1 order by `sal` desc
) as `temp` where `rank` between 4 and 6;
```

Example 2: Query the names and department names of the top two highest-paid employees in each department.

```SQL
select `ename`, `sal`, `dname` 
from (
    select 
        `ename`, `sal`, `dno`,
        rank() over (partition by `dno` order by `sal` desc) as `rank`
    from `tb_emp`
) as `temp` natural join `tb_dept` where `rank`<=2;
```

> **Note**: In MySQL versions before 8, we can complete a similar operation in the following way.

```SQL
select `ename`, `sal`, `dname` from `tb_emp` as `t1` 
natural join `tb_dept` 
where (
        select count(*) from `tb_emp` as `t2` 
        where `t1`.`dno`=`t2`.`dno` and `t2`.`sal`>`t1`.`sal` 
)<2 order by `dno` asc, `sal` desc;
```
