## Indexes

Indexes are the most important way to improve query performance in relational databases. An index in a relational database is like the table of contents of a book. We can imagine that if we want to find some knowledge point in a book, but the book has no table of contents, how terrible that would be. We probably have to turn page by page to know where that knowledge point is. Creating an index will bring storage overhead, just as the table of contents of a book takes up some space, but after giving up some space, the reduction in query time is also very obvious.

Columns of all data types in MySQL can be indexed. For the InnoDB storage engine in MySQL 8.0, it supports three kinds of indexes: B+ tree indexes, full-text indexes, and R-tree indexes. Here, we only introduce the most widely used B+ tree index. The reason for using B+ tree is very simple, because it is the most efficient data structure now for massive data storage and sorting based on disk. B+ tree is a [balanced tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-balancing_binary_search_tree). The height of the tree is usually 3 or 4, but it can save data from millions to billions. To query one row of data from this data, only 3 or 4 I/O operations are needed.

B+ tree is made of a root node, middle nodes, and leaf nodes. The leaf nodes are used to save sorted data. Because records on the index are sorted, when finding data inside one leaf node, binary search can be used. This search way is very efficient. When the amount of data is small, a B+ tree has only one root node, and the data is also saved on the root node. As the records become more and more, the B+ tree splits. The root node no longer saves data, but provides pointers to the next-level nodes, which helps quickly decide which leaf node the data is in.

When creating a two-dimensional table, we usually specify a primary key column for the table. An index is created on the primary key column by default. For the MySQL InnoDB storage engine, because it uses the index-organized table storage structure, the index on the primary key is the data of the whole table, and this kind of index is also called a **clustered index**. Obviously, one table can have only one clustered index, otherwise the table data would have to be saved many times. The indexes we create by ourselves are all secondary indexes, and a more common name is **non-clustered indexes**. Through our custom non-clustered indexes, we can only locate the primary key of the record. When getting data, it may still be necessary to query again through the clustered index on the primary key. This phenomenon is called "back to table". So using a non-clustered index to get data is usually slower than using a clustered index.

Next, let us use a simple example to explain the meaning of indexes. For example, we want to find a student according to the student's name. This scene should be very common in actual development, just like finding products by product name. We can use MySQL's `explain` keyword to view the execution plan of SQL, that is, the specific steps for the database to execute the SQL statement.

```SQL
explain select * from tb_student where stuname='Lin Zhennan'\G
```

```
*************************** 1. row ***************************
           id: 1
  select_type: SIMPLE
        table: tb_student
   partitions: NULL
         type: ALL
possible_keys: NULL
          key: NULL
      key_len: NULL
          ref: NULL
         rows: 11
     filtered: 10.00
        Extra: Using where
1 row in set, 1 warning (0.00 sec)
```

In the SQL execution plan above, several items are worth our attention:

1. `select_type`: the type of query.
   - `SIMPLE`: simple `SELECT`, no need to use `UNION` or subquery.
   - `PRIMARY`: if the query contains a subquery, the outermost `SELECT` is marked as `PRIMARY`.
   - `UNION`: the second or later `SELECT` statement in a `UNION` operation.
   - `SUBQUERY`: the first `SELECT` in a subquery.
   - `DERIVED`: the `SELECT` subquery of a derived table.
2. `table`: the table corresponding to the query.
3. `type`: the way MySQL finds rows that satisfy the condition in the table, also called the access type. It includes `ALL` (full table scan), `index` (full index scan, only walks through the index tree), `range` (index range scan), `ref` (non-unique index scan), `eq_ref` (unique index scan), `const` / `system` (constant-level query), and `NULL` (no need to access the table or index). Among all access types, `ALL` is obviously the worst in performance. The full table scan it represents means every row in the table has to be scanned to find matching rows.
4. `possible_keys`: indexes that MySQL can choose, but **it may not use them**.
5. `key`: the index MySQL really uses. If it is `NULL`, it means no index is used.
6. `key_len`: the length of the used index. Of course, when the query is not affected, the shorter the length, the better.
7. `rows`: the number of rows the query needs to scan. This is an **estimated value**.
8. `extra`: extra information about the query.
   - `Using filesort`: MySQL cannot use the index to finish the sorting operation.
   - `Using index`: only index information is used, and it is not necessary to look up the table again to get more information.
   - `Using temporary`: MySQL needs to use a temporary table to save the result set. This is often used for grouping and sorting.
   - `Impossible where`: the `where` clause leads to no rows that satisfy the condition.
   - `Distinct`: after MySQL finds the first matching row, it stops searching for more rows for the current row combination.
   - `Using where`: the queried columns are not covered by the index, and the filter condition is not the leading column of the index.

From the execution plan above, we can see that when we query a student by student name, it is actually doing a full table scan. Needless to say, this query performance must be very bad, especially when there are many rows in the table. If we need to often query students by student name, then we should create an index on the column corresponding to the student name, and use the index to speed up the query.

```SQL
create index idx_student_name on tb_student(stuname);
```

Check the execution plan of the SQL just now again.

```SQL
explain select * from tb_student where stuname='Lin Zhennan'\G
```

```
*************************** 1. row ***************************
           id: 1
  select_type: SIMPLE
        table: tb_student
   partitions: NULL
         type: ref
possible_keys: idx_student_name
          key: idx_student_name
      key_len: 62
          ref: const
         rows: 1
     filtered: 100.00
        Extra: NULL
1 row in set, 1 warning (0.00 sec)
```

You can notice that after creating an index on the student name, the query just now is no longer a full table scan but an index-based query, and the number of scanned rows is only one unique row. This obviously greatly improves query performance. MySQL also allows creating a prefix index, that is, creating an index on the first N characters of the indexed field. In this way, the space occupied by the index can be reduced, but saving space may very likely waste time. **Time and space are irreconcilable contradictions**, as shown below.

```SQL
create index idx_student_name_1 on tb_student(stuname(1));
```

The index above is equal to creating an index according to the first character of the student's name. Let us look at the SQL execution plan again.

```SQL
explain select * from tb_student where stuname='Lin Zhennan'\G
```

```
*************************** 1. row ***************************
           id: 1
  select_type: SIMPLE
        table: tb_student
   partitions: NULL
         type: ref
possible_keys: idx_student_name
          key: idx_student_name
      key_len: 5
          ref: const
         rows: 2
     filtered: 100.00
        Extra: Using where
1 row in set, 1 warning (0.00 sec)
```

I do not know whether everyone noticed that this time the scanned rows became 2 rows, because there are two students whose surname is "Lin" in the student table. If we only use the first character of the name as the index, then through the index the query will find these two rows.

If you want to delete an index, you can use the SQL below.

```SQL
alter table tb_student drop index idx_student_name;
```

or

```SQL
drop index idx_student_name on tb_student;
```

When creating indexes, we can also use composite indexes and function indexes, which MySQL 5.7 started to support. Making good use of composite indexes to achieve **index coverage** can reduce unnecessary sorting and back-to-table operations, and this will let query performance improve by multiples. Interested readers can study it by themselves.

We simply summarize the design rules of indexes for everyone:

1. The columns **most suitable** for indexes are the columns that appear in the **`WHERE` clause** and join clauses.
2. The larger the cardinality of the indexed column is, that is, the more values and the fewer repeated values, the better the effect of the index is.
3. Using a **prefix index** can reduce the space occupied by the index, and more indexes can be cached in memory.
4. **The more indexes, the better** is wrong. Although indexes speed up read operations, that is, queries, write operations, including insert, delete, and update, all become slower, because changes in data lead to updates of indexes, just like adding or deleting chapters in a book needs to update the table of contents.
5. When using the InnoDB storage engine, the normal index of a table saves the value of the primary key, so **the primary key should choose as short a data type as possible**. This can effectively reduce the space occupied by the index and improve the caching effect of the index.

Finally, one more point needs to be explained. For the B-tree index used by InnoDB, for numeric columns, besides equality comparison, the index still works when using `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `BETWEEN...AND...`, and `<>`; for string columns, if fuzzy query is used and the wildcard is not at the beginning, the index also works, but in other situations the index becomes invalid, which means a full table query is very likely to be done.
