## Connecting Python to MySQL

In Python 3, we can use the third-party library `mysqlclient` or `pymysql` to connect to the MySQL database and do data persistence operations. The usage of the two is exactly the same, only the imported module name is different. We recommend everyone use the pure Python third-party library `pymysql`, because it is easier to install successfully.

Below, we still use the `hrs` database created earlier as an example, to show how to use a Python program to operate the MySQL database and do data persistence operations.

### Connecting to MySQL

First, we can install `pymysql` with the command below in the command line or in PyCharm's terminal. If you need to connect to MySQL 8, you also need to install a third-party library named `cryptography` to support the MySQL 8 password authentication method.

```Shell
pip install pymysql cryptography
```

The steps for using `pymysql` to operate MySQL are shown below:

1. Create a connection. After the MySQL server starts, it provides a network service based on TCP, the Transmission Control Protocol. We can connect to the MySQL server through the `connect` function of the `pymysql` module. When calling the `connect` function, we need to specify parameters such as host (`host`), port (`port`), username (`user`), password (`password`), database (`database`), and character set (`charset`). This function returns a `Connection` object.
2. Get a cursor. After successfully connecting to the MySQL server, the next thing to do is send SQL statements to the database server. MySQL will execute the received SQL and return the execution result through the network. To do this, we first need to get a cursor, that is, a `Cursor` object, through the `cursor` method of the connection object.
3. Send SQL. Through the `execute` method of the cursor object, we can send SQL statements to the database.
4. If an `insert`, `delete`, or `update` operation is executed, we need to commit or roll back the transaction according to the actual situation. Because when the connection is created, the transaction environment is turned on by default. After the operation is completed, we need to use the `commit` or `rollback` method of the connection object to commit or roll back the transaction. The `rollback` method is usually put in the exception handling block `except`. If a `select` operation is executed, we need to fetch the query result through the cursor object. There are three methods for this: `fetchone`, `fetchmany`, and `fetchall`. Among them, `fetchone` fetches one record and returns it as a tuple or dictionary; `fetchmany` and `fetchall` fetch multiple records and return them as nested tuples or a list of dictionaries.
5. Close the connection. After finishing the persistence operation, please do not forget to close the connection and release external resources. We usually use the `close` method of the connection object in the `finally` block to close the connection.

Below, we will use actual code to demonstrate the five steps above.

### Code Examples

#### Insert Data

```Python
import pymysql

no = int(input('Department ID: '))
name = input('Department name: ')
location = input('Department location: ')

# 1. Create a connection
conn = pymysql.connect(host='127.0.0.1', port=3306,
                       user='guest', password='Guest.618',
                       database='hrs', charset='utf8mb4')
try:
    # 2. Get a cursor
    with conn.cursor() as cursor:
        # 3. Execute SQL
        affected_rows = cursor.execute(
            'insert into `tb_dept` values (%s, %s, %s)',
            (no, name, location)
        )
        if affected_rows == 1:
            print('Department inserted successfully!')
    # 4. Commit the transaction
    conn.commit()
except pymysql.MySQLError as err:
    conn.rollback()
    print(type(err), err)
finally:
    # 5. Close the connection
    conn.close()
```

> **Note**: `127.0.0.1` above is called the loopback address. It means the local machine. The `guest` below is a user I created in advance. This user has `insert`, `delete`, `update`, and `select` permissions on the `hrs` database. We do not recommend that everyone directly use the `root` super administrator account to access the database in a project. Doing that is really too dangerous.

Example SQL to create that user:

```SQL
create user 'guest'@'%' identified by 'Guest.618';
grant insert, delete, update, select on `hrs`.* to 'guest'@'%';
```

If you need to insert a large amount of data, it is recommended to use the `executemany` method of the cursor object to do batch processing, that is, one `insert` operation followed by many groups of data. Everyone can try inserting 10,000 records into a table, and then see the difference between inserting one by one without batch processing and inserting with batch processing. The first parameter of the `executemany` method is still an SQL statement, and the second parameter can be a list or tuple containing many groups of data.

#### Delete Data

```Python
import pymysql

no = int(input('Department ID: '))

conn = pymysql.connect(host='127.0.0.1', port=3306,
                       user='guest', password='Guest.618',
                       database='hrs', charset='utf8mb4',
                       autocommit=True)
try:
    with conn.cursor() as cursor:
        affected_rows = cursor.execute(
            'delete from `tb_dept` where `dno`=%s',
            (no, )
        )
        if affected_rows == 1:
            print('Department deleted successfully!')
finally:
    conn.close()
```

> **Note**: If you do not want to manually commit or roll back the transaction after every SQL operation, you can add a parameter named `autocommit` in the `connect` function and set it to `True`, which means after each SQL is executed successfully, it is committed automatically. But we recommend everyone commit or roll back manually, so that the transaction environment can be built according to the actual business needs. If you do not want to catch and handle exceptions, you can directly put `finally` after the `try` block. Omitting `except` means that when an exception happens, the code will crash directly and show the exception stack in the terminal.

#### Update Data

```Python
import pymysql

no = int(input('Department ID: '))
name = input('Department name: ')
location = input('Department location: ')

conn = pymysql.connect(host='127.0.0.1', port=3306,
                       user='guest', password='Guest.618',
                       database='hrs', charset='utf8mb4')
try:
    with conn.cursor() as cursor:
        affected_rows = cursor.execute(
            'update `tb_dept` set `dname`=%s, `dloc`=%s where `dno`=%s',
            (name, location, no)
        )
        if affected_rows == 1:
            print('Department updated successfully!')
    conn.commit()
except pymysql.MySQLError as err:
    conn.rollback()
    print(type(err), err)
finally:
    conn.close()
```

#### Query Data

1. Query the department table:

```Python
import pymysql

conn = pymysql.connect(host='127.0.0.1', port=3306,
                       user='guest', password='Guest.618',
                       database='hrs', charset='utf8mb4')
try:
    with conn.cursor() as cursor:
        cursor.execute('select `dno`, `dname`, `dloc` from `tb_dept`')
        row = cursor.fetchone()
        while row:
            print(row)
            row = cursor.fetchone()
except pymysql.MySQLError as err:
    print(type(err), err)
finally:
    conn.close()
```

> **Note**: In the code above, we use a `while` loop to fetch the query result row by row. This way is especially suitable when the query result has a very large number of rows. Because if `fetchall` is used to fetch all records into a nested tuple at one time, it will cause very large memory overhead, and in many scenarios this is not a good idea. If you do not want to use a `while` loop, you can also think about using the `iter` function to build an iterator and fetch data row by row. Interested readers can study it by themselves.

2. Paginated query on the employee table:

```Python
import pymysql

page = int(input('Page: '))
size = int(input('Page size: '))

con = pymysql.connect(host='127.0.0.1', port=3306,
                      user='guest', password='Guest.618',
                      database='hrs', charset='utf8')
try:
    with con.cursor(pymysql.cursors.DictCursor) as cursor:
        cursor.execute(
            'select `eno`, `ename`, `job`, `sal` from `tb_emp` order by `sal` desc limit %s,%s',
            ((page - 1) * size, size)
        )
        for emp_dict in cursor.fetchall():
            print(emp_dict)
finally:
    con.close()
```

### Example: Export Database Data to Excel

Below we explain an example of exporting database table data to an Excel file. We first need to install the third-party library `openpyxl`. The command is shown below.

```Bash
pip install openpyxl
```

Next, through the code below, we export all employees' ID, name, job, monthly salary, allowance, and department name from the `hrs` database to an Excel file.

```Python
import openpyxl
import pymysql

workbook = openpyxl.Workbook()
sheet = workbook.active
sheet.title = 'Employee Basic Info'
sheet.append(('Employee ID', 'Name', 'Job', 'Salary', 'Allowance', 'Department'))

conn = pymysql.connect(host='127.0.0.1', port=3306,
                       user='guest', password='Guest.618',
                       database='hrs', charset='utf8mb4')
try:
    with conn.cursor() as cursor:
        cursor.execute(
            'select `eno`, `ename`, `job`, `sal`, coalesce(`comm`, 0), `dname` '
            'from `tb_emp` natural join `tb_dept`'
        )
        row = cursor.fetchone()
        while row:
            sheet.append(row)
            row = cursor.fetchone()
    workbook.save('hrs.xlsx')
except pymysql.MySQLError as err:
    print(err)
finally:
    conn.close()
```

You can refer to the example above and try importing the data in an Excel file into the specified table of the specified database, and see whether it can be done successfully.
