## Python Reading and Writing CSV Files

### An Introduction to CSV Files

CSV, the full name is Comma Separated Values, is a simple and common file format. It is widely used in data import and export of applications such as databases and spreadsheets, and in data exchange between heterogeneous systems. Because CSV is a plain text file, no matter what operating system and programming language, they can all handle plain text. Also, many programming languages provide support for reading and writing CSV files, so the CSV format is widely used in data processing and data science.

CSV files have the following characteristics:

1. They are plain text and use some character set, such as [ASCII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII), [Unicode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode), or [GB2312](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GB_2312).
2. They are composed of records, typically one record per line.
3. Each record is split into fields, or columns, by a delimiter such as a comma, semicolon, or tab.
4. Each record follows the same sequence of fields.

CSV files can be opened and edited with a text editor or tools similar to Excel. When you open a CSV file with spreadsheet software such as Excel, you may barely notice any difference between a CSV file and an Excel workbook. Many database systems support exporting data to CSV files, and they also support importing CSV data back into the database, but that is not the focus of our discussion here.

### Writing Data to a CSV File

Suppose we need to save the exam scores of five students in three courses into a CSV file. To do that, we can use the `csv` module from Python's standard library. The module's `writer` function returns a `csvwriter` object, and through the `writerow` or `writerows` methods of that object we can write data into a CSV file. The code is shown below.

```python
import csv
import random

with open('scores.csv', 'w') as file:
    writer = csv.writer(file)
    writer.writerow(['name', 'Chinese', 'Mathematics', 'English'])
    names = ['Guan Yu', 'Zhang Fei', 'Zhao Yun', 'Ma Chao', 'Huang Zhong']
    for name in names:
        scores = [random.randrange(50, 101) for _ in range(3)]
        scores.insert(0, name)
        writer.writerow(scores)
```

The generated CSV file looks like this.

```text
name,Chinese,Mathematics,English
Guan Yu,98,86,61
Zhang Fei,86,58,80
Zhao Yun,95,73,70
Ma Chao,83,97,55
Huang Zhong,61,54,87
```

It should be explained that for the `writer` function above, besides passing in the file object to write data to, we can also pass the `dialect` parameter, which means the dialect of the CSV file, and its default value is `excel`. Besides that, we can also use the parameters `delimiter`, `quotechar`, and `quoting` to specify the delimiter, the character for surrounding values, and the way of surrounding. Among them, the character for surrounding values is mainly used when there are special symbols in a field. By adding the surrounding character, ambiguity can be avoided. You can try changing the code above to the following code, and then look at the generated CSV file.

```python
writer = csv.writer(file, delimiter='|', quoting=csv.QUOTE_ALL)
```

The generated CSV file will then look like this.

```text
"name"|"Chinese"|"Mathematics"|"English"
"Guan Yu"|"88"|"64"|"65"
"Zhang Fei"|"76"|"93"|"79"
"Zhao Yun"|"78"|"55"|"76"
"Ma Chao"|"72"|"77"|"68"
"Huang Zhong"|"70"|"72"|"51"
```

### Reading Data from a CSV File

If we want to read the CSV file we just created, we can use the code below. The `reader` function in the `csv` module creates a `csvreader` object. That object is an iterator, so we can read data from the file with either the `next` function or a `for-in` loop.

```python
import csv

with open('scores.csv', 'r') as file:
    reader = csv.reader(file, delimiter='|')
    for data_list in reader:
        print(reader.line_num, end='\t')
        for elem in data_list:
            print(elem, end='\t')
        print()
```

> **Note**: In the `for` loop above, each iteration retrieves a list object from `csvreader`, and that list contains all the fields in one row.

### Summary

If everyone uses Python for data analysis in the future, it is very likely that you will use the third-party library named `pandas`. It is one of the magic tools of Python data analysis. In `pandas`, the functions named `read_csv` and `to_csv` are wrapped for reading and writing CSV files. `read_csv` turns the data read into a `DataFrame` object, and `DataFrame` is the most important type in the `pandas` library. It wraps a series of methods used for data processing, such as cleaning, transformation, and aggregation. `to_csv` writes the data in a `DataFrame` object into a CSV file and completes data persistence. The `read_csv` function and the `to_csv` function are much more powerful than the native `csvreader` and `csvwriter`.
