## RESTful Architecture and DRF Advanced

Besides the method talked about in the previous lesson, using DRF to create REST-style data APIs can also be done with CBV, meaning class-based views. The feature of creating data APIs with CBV is that the code is simple and development efficiency is high, but it is not as flexible as FBV, meaning function-based views. This is because when using FBV, what code the view function runs and what data it returns can be highly customized. Below, we use the subject data API as an example to explain how to customize a data API through CBV.

### Using CBV

#### Inheriting from a Subclass of `APIView`

Modify `polls/views.py` in the previous project, remove the `show_subjects` view function, and add a class named `SubjectView`. This class inherits from `ListAPIView`. `ListAPIView` can receive GET requests. It wraps the `get` method for getting a data list and returning JSON data. `ListAPIView` is a subclass of `APIView`. `APIView` has many other subclasses. For example, `CreateAPIView` can support POST requests, `UpdateAPIView` can support PUT and PATCH requests, and `DestroyAPIView` can support DELETE requests. The code of `SubjectView` is shown below.

```python
from rest_framework.generics import ListAPIView


class SubjectView(ListAPIView):
    # Use queryset to specify how to get subject data
    queryset = Subject.objects.all()
    # Use serializer_class to specify how to serialize subject data
    serializer_class = SubjectSerializer
```

As we just said, because the parent class `ListAPIView` of `SubjectView` has already implemented the `get` method to handle GET requests for getting the subject list, we only need to declare how to get subject data and how to serialize subject data. The former is specified by the `queryset` attribute, and the latter is specified by the `serializer_class` attribute. To use the `SubjectView` above, we need to modify the `urls.py` file, as shown below.

```python
urlpatterns = [
    path('api/subjects/', SubjectView.as_view()),
]
```

Clearly, this way is much simpler than the FBV way mentioned before.

#### Inheriting from `ModelViewSet`

If the data API for subjects needs to support GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, and DELETE requests, so that it supports getting, creating, updating, and deleting subject resources, a simpler way is to inherit from `ModelViewSet` to write the subject view class. Modify `polls/views.py` again, remove the `SubjectView` class, and add a class named `SubjectViewSet`. The code is shown below.

```python
from rest_framework.viewsets import ModelViewSet


class SubjectViewSet(ModelViewSet):
    queryset = Subject.objects.all()
    serializer_class = SubjectSerializer
```

By checking the source code of the `ModelViewSet` class, we can find that this class has 6 parent classes. The first 5 parent classes implement support for POST, meaning creating a subject, GET, meaning getting the specified subject, PUT/PATCH, meaning updating a subject, DELETE, meaning deleting a subject, and GET, meaning getting the subject list. The corresponding methods are `create`, `retrieve`, `update`, `destroy`, and `list`. Because the parent classes of `ModelViewSet` have already implemented these methods, we almost finish the whole set of subject data APIs without writing much code. What we need to do is only point out how to get the data, specified through the `queryset` attribute, and how to serialize the data, specified through the `serializer_class` attribute. This point is the same as the way above that inherits from a subclass of `APIView`.

```python
class ModelViewSet(mixins.CreateModelMixin,
                   mixins.RetrieveModelMixin,
                   mixins.UpdateModelMixin,
                   mixins.DestroyModelMixin,
                   mixins.ListModelMixin,
                   GenericViewSet):
    """
    A viewset that provides default `create()`, `retrieve()`, `update()`,
    `partial_update()`, `destroy()` and `list()` actions.
    """
    pass
```

To use the `SubjectViewSet` above, URL mapping needs to be done in the `urls.py` file. Because `ModelViewSet` is like a collection of multiple view functions, this is different from the URL mapping way used before. We need to first create a router and register `SubjectViewSet` through it, and then add the generated URLs after successful registration to the `urlpatterns` list together. The code is shown below.

```python
from rest_framework.routers import DefaultRouter

router = DefaultRouter()
router.register('api/subjects', SubjectViewSet)
urlpatterns += router.urls
```

Besides the `ModelViewSet` class, DRF also provides a class named `ReadOnlyModelViewSet`. As the name shows, this class is a collection of read-only views, which means the data API customized by inheriting from it can only support GET requests, that is, requests for getting a single resource and a resource list.

### Data Pagination

When using GET requests to get a resource list, we usually do not load all the data at one time, unless the amount of data is really small. Most operations that get resource lists support data pagination, which means we can get different data by specifying the page number, or something like the page number, and the page size, which means how many pieces of data to load at one time. We can implement pagination by slicing the `QuerySet` object, and we can also use the `Paginator` and `Page` objects wrapped by the Django framework. When using DRF, we can modify `REST_FRAMEWORK` in the Django configuration file and configure the default pagination class and page size to implement pagination, as shown below.

```python
REST_FRAMEWORK = {
    'PAGE_SIZE': 10,
    'DEFAULT_PAGINATION_CLASS': 'rest_framework.pagination.PageNumberPagination'
}
```

Besides the `PageNumberPagination` paginator configured above, DRF also provides the `LimitOffsetPagination` and `CursorPagination` paginators. One thing worth mentioning is `CursorPagination`. It can avoid exposing the total amount of website data when using page-number pagination. Interested readers can look into it by themselves. If you do not want to use the default pagination settings in the configuration file, you can add a `pagination_class` attribute in the view class to specify another paginator again. Usually, this attribute can be set to a custom paginator, as shown below.

```python
from rest_framework.pagination import PageNumberPagination


class CustomizedPagination(PageNumberPagination):
    # Default page size
    page_size = 5
    # Query parameter corresponding to page size
    page_size_query_param = 'size'
    # Maximum page size
    max_page_size = 50
```

```python
class SubjectView(ListAPIView):
    # Specify how to get data
    queryset = Subject.objects.all()
    # Specify how to serialize data
    serializer_class = SubjectSerializer
    # Specify how to paginate
    pagination_class = CustomizedPagination
```

If you do not want data pagination, you can set the `pagination_class` attribute to `None` to cancel the default paginator.

### Data Filtering

If you want to use CBV to customize the data API for getting teacher information, this can also be done by inheriting from `ListAPIView`. But because teacher information needs to be obtained according to the specified subject, teacher data needs to be filtered instead of getting all teacher data directly. If you want to get the subject number from the request and filter teachers through the subject number, you can do it by overriding the `get_queryset` method. The code is shown below.

```python
class TeacherView(ListAPIView):
    serializer_class = TeacherSerializer

    def get_queryset(self):
        queryset = Teacher.objects.defer('subject')
        try:
            sno = self.request.GET.get('sno', '')
            queryset = queryset.filter(subject__no=sno)
            return queryset
        except ValueError:
            raise Http404('No teachers found.')
```

Besides the way above, we can also use the third-party library `django-filter` together with DRF to implement data filtering. After using `django-filter`, we can support data filtering by configuring the `filter-backends` attribute for the view class and specifying `DjangoFilterBackend`. After the configuration above is finished, we can use the `filter_fields` attribute or the `filterset_class` attribute to specify how to filter data. Interested readers can study it by themselves.
